As we saw in the previous video,
the sensitivity report is a very
valuable tool for what-if analysis.
We also saw that it has
two main limitations.
First, the report can only tell you what
will happen to the optimal solution,
when you make one change at a time and
everything else remains the same.
For example, we saw that the shadow price
of a capacity constraint can tell you
the reduction in total cost for
every unit of additional capacity.
That's great but
it assumes that all other capacities are
going to stay at the same current values.
So, if we would like to know
the effect on the total costs,
when we change two capacity
limits at the same time,
we'll have to make the change
in the model and resolve.
The other limitation
is that the prices and
costs in the sensitivity report
are only valid in a specified range.
For example, this sensitivity report
is the one that we generated in our
last video for our transportation problem.
Cell $G$16 refers to the total amount
shipped from Supplier A to all customers.
You can see that the total amount is 60,
and that the capacity of
Supplier A is also 60.
The capacity is given by the right
hand side of the constraint.
The shadow price is -4,
and indicates that for
every unit of additional capacity,
the total cost decr eases by $4.
If this is all you are interested in
evaluating in your what-if analysis,
then the only thing that you need to
remember is that this price is only valid
within 20 units of increase.
This is given in the Allowable Increase
column of the table.
What you're going to learn
in this video is how to
evaluate the scenarios that involve
more than a single change, or
where the change is outside the valid
range of the sensitivity report.
You will also learn how to use Excel
charts to visualize sensitivity results.
We will continue to use a transportation
problem to illustrate these concepts.
Let's assume that there is uncertainty
in the demand of customer 4, and that we
would like to see how the optimal solution
changes with changes in this demand.
Locate and
open the Excel file Transportation
Problem- Parameter Analysis.
This file contains the transportation
model that we have been discussing
in this module.
Note that the demand for
customer 4 is now 40 instead of 65.
This is because we have added
the ASP function PsiOptParam.
This function tells the software that
we will like to solve the problem for
values of this demand
that vary from 40 to 90.
If we go to the Analysis group of
the ASP tab and click on Reports,
we'll find Parameter Analysis
on their Optimization reports.
These dialog allows us to identify
the variables and the objective function
that we want in our report, and
also the parameters that we want to vary.
Since we want to analyze the changes
in all the variables and
the total cost, click on the double arrow.
Also click on the double arrow for
the Parameters,
leave the rest unchanged,
including the 11 major access points.
By clicking OK, ASP generates
the analysis report one time.
This is the same table that is in
the analysis report worksheet,
included in the file.
Which I have already formatted,
and I have included for
those of you without access to ASP.
The table shows 11 solutions to
the problem, 1 solution per demand value.
The demand varies from 40 to 90,
and as expected the cost
increases with the demand.
The most important insight
from this analysis is that,
some suppliers ship the same
amount to the same customers
regardless of the changes in
the demand of customer 4.
For example supplier D, ships four units
to customer 1 in all the scenarios.
Also supplier E only ships to customer 4.
Shipments from supplier B
are also pretty stable.
Suppliers A and C experience the most
changes, when the demand for
customer 4 varies.
It is possible to create more complicated
scenarios using the parameter analysis
tool, by adding more parameters
that can change values.
However, we're not going to
cover that in this course.
We have seen that the interpretation
of the solver reports requires some
technical knowledge of
optimization terminology.
You have learned how to interpret shadow
prices and reduce costs, but you can't
expect clients or other people in your
organization to know these concepts.
Data visualization can help present
results in forms that are more
understandable to those not
familiar with optimization.
Let's start with shipments.
Instead of showing the results in a table,
you can create a chart
with one bar per supplier.
The length of the bar is the total
shipments sent by the supplier, and
the colors represent the customers.
From the supplier side,
you can see that suppliers B, D and
E supply to only one customer.
From the customer's side,
you can see that customer 3 receives
units from three different suppliers.
The chart gives you insights
on the level of coordination
that the solution requires.
Clearly, it is easier to coordinate
shipments from a single supplier
to a single customer.
Now, let's take a look at
the capacity constraints.
Instead of showing the values in the
sensitivity report, you can create a bar
chart that compares the total shipments
and the capacity for each supplier.
In this chart,
orange bars indicate capacity and
the blue bars indicate total shipments.
The chart reveals that three suppliers, A,
D, and E, utilize all of their capacity.
On the other hand, suppliers B and
C, have extra capacity.
As you know, the sensitivity report
includes reduced cost information.
Reduced cost are a little
more difficult to visualize.
The key concept as we discussed in our
previous video, is that at reduced cost
tells you the amount by which
a current cost needs to decrease,
in order to make it attractive.
For example, these tables shows
the reduced costs for supplier A.
Take a look at the first row
which corresponds to A1.
This is the variable that represents the
units sent from supplier A to customer 1.
In the optimal solution,
A1 has a value of 15 units.
The cost of sending these
15 units is $3 per unit as
shown by the objective coefficient.
The reduced cost in this case is 0.
Because $3 per unit is already
attracted to send units from
supplier A to customer 1.
Now take a look at A2.
It's final value is 0.
This means that at the current cost of 7,
it is not attractive to send units
from supplier A to customer 2.
The reduced cost is also 7, so
the cost has to drop to 0 for
this option to be attractive.
Well, this is probably
not going to happen.
So if everything else stays the same,
sending units from supplier A to
customer 2 is not a good idea.
The best way to visualize this information
is to convert all reduced
costs to negative values.
Then you can create a bar chart that shows
the current costs as positive values,
and the reduced costs as negative values.
Do this only for
those variables with a final value of 0.
The chart shows that there are variables,
such as A2, D2 and E3,
that require very large cost reductions to
make those shipment options attractive.
It also shows that it would require
a modest cost reduction for
B4 and C4 to become viable options.
In this video, you have learned how
to do a parameter analysis to review
changes in the optimal solution
when key input data changes.
Parameter analysis provides information
about the robustness of the solution
in the face of uncertainty of input
values, such as customer demand.
You have also learned how to present
results from an optimization model to
those who might not be familiar with
prescriptive analytics concepts.
This is pre-advanced analytics, and
I'm glad that you're
mastering all these material.
By the way, if you want to see
how the charts were created,
you can review the Excel file
Transportation Problem- Visualization.